---
 title: "Data Science is not just about Data Science"
 date: 2018-05-01T00:00:00+02:00
 image: buecher2.jpg
 summary: "7 Popular Science Books that you have to read"
 author: "Johannes"
---


The other day I went through the list of books I have read over the last
half a year. And I noticed that most popular science books on that list
were somewhat related to data science – in one way or the other. I found
it fascinating how many different subjects and areas are related to what
we do every day as data analysts and scientists. Therefore, I want to
take the opportunity and quickly review some of the books, give my
opinion on why those books matter for us as data analysts, and maybe
give you some inspiration about what to read next.

### 1. The psychological aspect of data science

I start with two books that are originally from the field of psychology
and economics. The authors of both books have won the Nobel prize for
economics and both have in common that they change the way we think
about statistics and data.

**Daniel Kahneman's “Thinking, fast and slow”** is a modern classic. He
gives a broad overview of his research into how people reason, judge and
make decisions. By now, many have heard of the two different modes of
thinking: “system 1”, which is instinctive and fast and “system 2” which
is slower and more rational. It is fascinating, probably any of the
other books in this list refers to Kahneman in some way or another. That
just shows how influential his ideas and this book is. For me the book
is essential in a data science curriculum in two ways: Firstly, a lot of
data is generated by humans and it is, therefore, important to
understand how some of the data is generated and what biases could be
within. Secondly, the book reflects on how we think about statistics.
Kahneman claims that statistical thinking is not natural to most people
– not even statisticians. This is a good reminder to be careful when
communicating results.

The second book **“Nudge – Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness” by Richard Thaler** is about behavioral economics. The goal
of nudging is to change the behavior of people without imposing explicit
restrictions or bans. The concept has become rather influential in
different areas of marketing to health promotion. In Germany, the
concept is very controversial, and most commentators criticise it as
paternalistic. The authors themselves call nudging a form of
“libertarian paternalism”. I found the book really interesting for
another reason: Data Science gives us the opportunity to understand the
effects of the choice architecture in so many parts of life. This can be
used for good or for bad, but the potential damage of thinking about
choice architecture and designing them deliberately are smaller than not
thinking about it all.

### 2. The societal aspect of data science

This brings me to the second batch of books I have read about the
relationship between digitalization, big data, and society.

I started with **Jaron Lanier’s “Who owns the future”**. Even though it
is already a couple of years old, it is still a valuable reflection of
the relationship between emergent technologies and our economies. His
main argument is that the platform economy is disenfranchising the
middle class. Platform services are built on our data and we are giving
it to them for free (more or less). At the end of the book, he proposes
some kind of micro-payment system which he believes could fix the
system. I enjoyed reading the book, especially because it looks at the
emergence of tech companies and their business models not only in
technological terms but foremost as a macroeconomic challenge. I think
it is crucial that we move beyond this fixation on the technical aspects
to a more holistic understanding of how our societies change in the age
of digitalization.

A book that does this even more so is **Thomas L. Friedman’s “Thank you
for being late – An optimists guide to thriving in the age of
accelerations”**. Friedman takes on a truly holistic perspective. If you
want to know what GitHub and MapReduce have to do with the Syrian
refugee crisis and climate change, this book is for you! Friedman
describes several recent developments, connects them and puts them into
perspective. This book was probably the clearest account of how big data
is reshaping our economies and societies. What I particularly like is
that Friedman ends his book with actual, pragmatic policy proposals (and
not some idealistic but far-fetched ideas like Jaron Lanier).

A book taking a completely different and very critical perspective is
**Steffen Mau’s “Das metrisch Wir – Die Quantifizierung des Sozialen”**
(The metric society). Steffen Mau is a professor for macro-sociology in
Berlin and his book is a harsh criticism of recent trends in
“quantifying everything” – what he calls sociometrics. He discusses
rankings, votes, and recommendation systems against the backdrop of the
implicit sociological effects and epistemological foundations. The book
is by far the most critical and pessimistic book I have read (which was
actually the reason I wanted to read it in the first place), but it
didn’t offer too many new insights. The examples were discussed
extremely one-sided and most of the topics were covered at great length
before: Do we really need another book explaining that Facebook’s “Like
Button” is eroding our social interactions? And aren’t measurement
problems in surveys discussed in social science literature for decades?
On the meta-level Mau sees the quantification of everything as an
expression of our new neo-liberal society. This criticism is valid
without a doubt – but reading a book by Colin Crouch is probably more
fruitful in that domain.

### 3. The epistemological aspect of data science

This brings me to the last two books. Both are more directly related to
data science.

The first one is **The Signal and the Noise - Why So Many Predictions
Fail-but Some Don't** by **Nate Silver**. It is a beautiful introduction
to the art and science of prediction – one of the key goals of data
science. Nate Silver, who is most popular for his blog
fivethirtyeight.com has such a deep knowledge and enthusiasm for
scientific predictions which he conveys in a clear and inspiring way
while being agnostic about the limitations and problems. Silver also
reflects on the epistemological foundation of statistical forecasting
and predictions. The second half of the book is a great introduction to
the Bayesian epistemology. I loved the book so much that I read it
twice, and it then inspired me to do a TED Talk about that matter (find
the Talk [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pG6sE_oE488&t=2s)).
*Must read!*

The last book I read was **Pedro Domingos’ The Master Algorithm - How
the Quest for the Ultimate Learning Machine Will Remake Our World**.
Bill Gates called it “one the most important book about machine
learning”, so I bought it. It was indeed a very different introduction
to machine learning. Domingos introduces the different epistemic
communities and thought processes behind different kind of machine
learning techniques. I was rather surprised to learn that decision
trees, support vector machines, deep neural networks and Bayesian
learning techniques were quite separate in the communities that
developed them over the last decades and that the philosophical ideas
about “learning” and the world, in general, are very different. That was
the good part of the book. In the end, Domingos explains his quest to
combine all different learners to create what he calls “the master
algorithm”. While Steffen Mau’s book was too negative and too
pessimistic, this book is probably too optimistic and uncritical of the
developments in AI.

### Wrap-Up:

I hope you made it to the end of the list! And I hope you found
something interesting and new on this list. Data Science is not just
about data science. I think it is crucial that we as data enthusiasts
keep in mind that what we do transcends just “working with data”. On the
other side, it is more important than ever to communicate what we do –
for example by writing popular science books. Have you read some of the
books and have a different opinion? Was there a book you really enjoyed
reading about data science? And where are all the female authors writing
about this topic? If you have any suggestions, please let me know on
Twitter [@jj\_mllr](https://twitter.com/jj_mllr).

------------------------------------------------------------------------


