---
title: About P-Values
date: '2017-12-25T00:00:00+02:00'
image: 509-p-values.jpg
summary: Understanding Common Misconceptions
categories:
- Data Science
- Statistics
author:
  name: Daniel Lakens
  image: daniel-lakens.jpg
  description: Daniel Lakens is an experimental psychologist at the Human-Technology
    Interaction group at Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands. He publishes
    the weblog 'The 20% Statistician'.
  twitter: https://twitter.com/@lakens
  facebook: ''
  github: https://github.com/https://gist.github.com/Lakens
  email: ''
  website: ''
meta:
  title: CorrelAid - About P-Values
  description: A p-value is the probability of the observed, or more extreme, data,
    under the assumption that the null-hypothesis is true. The goal of this blog post
    is to understand what this means, and perhaps more importantly, what this doesn’t
    mean.
  image: 509-p-values.jpg
  keywords: CorrelAid, p-value, statistics
slug: understand-p-values
---

A p-value is the probability of the observed, or more extreme, data,
under the assumption that the null-hypothesis is true. The goal of this
blog post is to understand what this means, and perhaps more
importantly, what this doesn’t mean. People often misunderstand
p-values, but with a little help and some dedicated effort, we should be
able explain these misconceptions. Below is my attempt, but if you
prefer a more verbal explanation, I can recommend [Greenland et al.
(2016)](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10654-016-0149-3).

First, we need to know what ‘the assumption that the null-hypothesis is
true’ looks like. Although the null-hypothesis can be any value, here we
will assume the null-hypothesis is specified as a difference of 0. When
this model is visualized in text-books, or in power-analysis software
such as g\*power, you often see a graph like the one below, with
t-values on the horizontal axis, and a critical t-value somewhere around
1.96. For a mean difference, the p-value is calculated based on the
t-distribution (which is like a normal distribution, and the larger the
sample size, the more similar the two become). I will distinguish the
null hypothesis (the mean difference in the population is exactly 0)
from the null-model (a model of the data we should expect when we draw a
sample when the null-hypothesis is true) in this post.


{{< image 
    image="509-pv1.png"
>}}
P-Value 1
{{< /image >}}


I’ve recently realized that things become a lot clearer if you just plot
these distributions as mean differences, because you will more often
think about means, than about t-values. So below, you can see a
null-model, assuming a standard deviation of 1, for a t-test comparing
mean differences (because the SD = 1, you can also interpret the mean
differences as a Cohen’s d effect size).

{{< image 
    image="509-pv2.png"
>}}
P-Value 2
{{< /image >}}

The first thing to notice is that we expect that the mean of the
null-model is 0: The distribution is centered on 0. But even if the mean
in the population is 0, that does not imply every sample will give a
mean of exactly zero. There is variation around the mean, as a function
of the true standard deviation, and the sample size. One reason why I
prefer to plot the null-model in raw scores instead of t-values is that
you can see how the null-model changes, when the sample size increases.

{{< image 
    image="509-pv3.png"
>}}
P-Value 3
{{< /image >}}

When we collect 5000 instead of 50 observations, we see the null-model
is still centered on 0 – but in our null-model we now expect most values
will fall very close around 0. Due to the larger sample size, we should
expect to observe mean differences in our sample closer to 0 compared to
our null-model when we had only 50 observations.

Both graphs have areas that are colored red. These areas represent 2.5%
of the values in the left tail of the distribution, and 2.5% of the
values in the right tail of the distribution. Together, they make up 5%
of the most extreme mean differences we would expect to observe, given
our number of observations, when the true mean difference is exactly 0 –
representing the use of an alpha level of 5%. The vertical axis shows
the density of the curves.

Let’s assume that in the figure visualizing the null model for N = 50
(two figures up) we observe a mean difference of 0.5 in our data. This
observation falls in the red area in the right tail of the distribution.
This means that the observed mean difference is surprising, if we assume
that the true mean difference is 0. If the true mean difference is 0, we
should not expect such a extreme mean difference very often. If we
calculate a p-value for this observation, we get the probability of
observing a value more extreme (in either tail, when we do a two-tailed
test) than 0.5.

Take a look at the figure that shows the null-model when we have
collected 5000 observations (one figure up), and imagine we would again
observe a mean difference of 0.5. It should be clear that this same
difference is even more surprising than it was when we collected 50
observations.

We are now almost ready to address common misconceptions about p-values,
but before we can do this, we need to introduce a model of the data when
the null is not true. When the mean difference is not exactly 0, the
alternative hypothesis is true – but what does an alternative model look
like?

When we do a study, we rarely already know what the true mean difference
is (if we already knew, why would we do the study?). But let’s assume
there is an all-knowing entity. Following Paul Meehl, we will call this
all-knowing entity Omniscient Jones. Before we collect our sample of 50
observations, Omniscient Jones already knows that the true mean
difference in the population is 0.5. Again, we should expect some
variation around this true mean difference in our small sample. The
figure below again shows the expected data pattern when the
null-hypothesis is true (now indicated by a grey line) and it shows an
alternative model, assuming a true mean difference of 0.5 exists in the
population (indicated by a black line).

{{< image 
    image="509-pv4.png"
>}}
P-Value 4
{{< /image >}}

But Omniscient Jones could have said the true difference was much
larger. Let’s assume we do another study, but now before we collect our
50 observations, Omniscient Jones tells us that the true mean difference
is 1.5. The null model does not change, but the alternative model now
moves over to the right.

{{< image 
    image="509-pv5.png"
>}}
P-Value 5
{{< /image >}}

Now, we are finally ready to address some common misconceptions about
p-values. Before we look at misconceptions in some detail, I want to
remind you of one fact that is easy to remember, and will enable you to
recognize many misconceptions about p-values: p-values are a statement
about the probability of **data**, not a statement about the probability
of a **theory**. Whenever you see p-values interpreted as a probability
of a theory or a hypothesis, you know something is not right. Now let’s
take a look at why this is not right.

**1) Why a non-significant p-value does not mean that the
null-hypothesis is true.**

Let’s take a concrete example that will illustrate why a non-significant
result does not mean that the null-hypothesis is true. In the figure
below, Omniscient Jones tells us the true mean difference is again 0.5.
We have observed a mean difference of 0.35. This value does not fall
within the red area (and hence, the p-value is not smaller than our
alpha level, or p &gt; .05). Nevertheless, we see that observing a mean
difference of 0.35 is much more likely under the alternative model, than
under the null-model.

{{< image 
    image="509-pv6.png"
>}}
P-Value 6
{{< /image >}}

All the p-value tells us is that this value is not extremely surprising,
if we assume the null-hypothesis is true. A non-significant p-value does
not mean the null-hypothesis true. It might be, but it is also possible
that the data we have observed is more likely when the alternative
hypothesis is true, than when the null-hypothesis is true (as in the
figure above).

**2) Why a significant p-value does not mean that the null-hypothesis is
false.**

Imagine we generate a series of numbers in R using the following
command:


    rnorm(n = 50, mean = 0, sd = 1)

This command generates 50 random observations from a distribution with a
mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. We run this command once, and
we observe a mean difference of 0.5. We can perform a one-sample t-test
against 0, and this test tells us, with a p

Should we decide to reject the null-hypothesis that the random number
generator in R works? That would be a bold move indeed! We know that the
probability of observing surprising data, assuming the null hypothesis
is true, has a maximum of 5% when our alpha is 0.05. What we can
conclude, based on our data, is that we have observed an extreme
outcome, that should be considered surprising. But such an outcome is
not impossible when the null-hypothesis is true. And in this case, we
really don’t even have an alternative hypothesis that can explain the
data (beyond perhaps evil hackers taking over the website where you
downloaded R).

{{< image 
    image="509-pv7.png"
>}}
P-Value 7
{{< /image >}}

This misconception can be expressed in many forms. For example, one
version states that the p-value is the probability that the data were
generated by chance. Note that this is just a sneaky way to say: The
p-value is the probability that the null hypothesis is true, and we
observed an extreme p-value just due to random variation. As we
explained above, we can observe extreme data when we are basically 100%
certain that the null-hypothesis is true (the random number generator in
R works as it should), and seeing extreme data once should not make you
think the probability that the random number generator in R is working
is less than 5%, or in other words, that the probability that the random
number generator in R is broken is now more than 95%.

Remember: P-values are a statement about the probability of **data**,
not a statement about the probability of a **theory** or a
**hypothesis**.

**3) Why a significant p-value does not mean that a practically
important effect has been discovered.**

If we plot the null-model for a very large sample size (N = 100000) we
see that even very small mean differences (here, a mean difference of
0.01) will be considered ‘surprising’. We have such a large sample size,
that all means we observe should fall very close around 0, and even a
difference of 0.01 is already considered surprising, due to our
substantial level of accuracy because we collected so much data.

{{< image 
    image="509-pv8.png"
>}}
P-Value 8
{{< /image >}}

Note that nothing about the definition of a p-value changes: It still
correctly indicates that, if the null-hypothesis is true, we have
observed data that should be considered surprising. However, just
because data is surprising, does not mean we need to care about it. It
is mainly the verbal label ‘significant’ that causes confusion here – it
is perhaps less confusing to think of a ‘significant’ effect as a
‘surprising’ effect (as long as the null-model is realistic - which is
not automatically true).

This example illustrates why you should always report and interpret
effect sizes, with hypothesis tests. This is also why it is useful to
complement a hypothesis test with an equivalence test, so that you can
conclude the observed difference is surprisingly small if there is no
difference, but the observed difference is also surprisingly closer to
zero, assuming there exists any effect we consider meaningful (and thus,
we can conclude the effect is equivalence to zero).

**4) If you have observed a significant finding, the probability that
you have made a Type 1 error (a false positive) is not 5%.**

Assume we collect 20 observations, and Omniscient Jones tells us the
null-hypothesis is true. This means we are sampling from the following
distribution:

{{< image 
    image="509-pv9.png"
>}}
P-Value 9
{{< /image >}}

If this is our reality, it means that 100% of the time that we observe a
significant result, it is a false positive. Thus, 100% of our
significant results are Type 1 errors. What the Type 1 error rate
controls, is that from all studies we perform when the null is true, not
more than 5% of our observed mean differences will fall in the red tail
areas. But when they have fallen in the tail areas, they are always a
Type 1 error. After observing a significant result, you can not say it
has a 5% probability of being a false positive. But before you collect
data, you can say you will not conclude there is an effect, when there
is no effect, more than 5% of the time, in the long run.

**5) One minus the p-value is not the probability of observing another
significant result when the experiment is replicated.**

It is impossible to calculate the probability that an effect will
replicate, based on the p-value, and as a consequence, the p-value can
not inform us about the p-value we will observe in future studies. When
we have observed a p-value of 0.05, it is not 95% certain the finding
will replicate. Only when we make additional assumptions (e.g., the
assumption that the alternative effect is true, and the effect size that
was observed in the original study is exactly correct) can we model the
p-value distribution for future studies.

It might be useful to visualize the one very specific situation when the
p-value **does** provide the probability that future studies will
provide a significant p-value (even though in practice, we will never
know if we are in this very specific situation). In the figure below we
have a null-model and alternative model for 150 observations. The
observed mean difference falls exactly on the threshold for the
significance level. This means the p-value is 0.05. In this specific
situation, it is also 95 probable that we will observe a significant
result in a replication study, assuming there is a true effect as
specified by the alternative model. If this alternative model is true,
95% (1-p) of the observed means will fall on the right side of the
observed mean in the original study (we have a statistical power of
95%), and only 5% of the observed means will fall in the blue area
(which contains the Type 2 errors).

{{< image 
    image="509-pv10.png"
>}}
P-Value 10
{{< /image >}}

This very specific situation is almost always not your reality. It is
not true when any other alternative hypothesis is correct. And it is not
true when the the null-hypothesis is true. In short, the p-value
basically never, except for one very specific situation when the
alternative hypothesis is true and of a very specific size you will
never know you are in, gives the probability that a future study will
once again yield a significant result.

**Conclusion**

Probabilities are confusing, and the interpretation of a p-value is not
intuitive. Grammar is also confusing, and not intuitive. But where we
practice grammar in our education again and again and again until you
get it, we don’t practice the interpretation of p-values again and again
and again until you get it. Some repetition is probably needed.
Explanations of what p-values mean are often verbal, and if there are
figures, they use t-value distributions we are unfamiliar with. Instead
of complaining that researchers don’t understand what p-values mean, I
think we should try to explain common misconceptions multiple times, in
multiple ways.

[Here you can find the R code for the
graphs.](https://gist.github.com/Lakens/cc1c3d81c151d2fd4021eba57caaf689)

*This post originally was published on December 5th 2017 on
*daniellakens.blogspot.de/*. We are very grateful that Daniel has
allowed us to cross-post this very insightful post on our blog. You can
find the original blog post
[here.](https://daniellakens.blogspot.de/2017/12/understanding-common-misconceptions.html)*

*The title picture was published 1917 and so it does not include any copyright.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------



